week ten

podcast

    second life --> it was a big deal for universities
        -everyone wanted to replicate spaces already available in the digital
    open context
        -open access artifact data
    Sarah Kanza & Eric Kanza
        -started open context
        -small datasets organized into large useful whole
        -software has to be constantly updated
        -context --> very important, but data often doesnt have much of it

hieroglyphics workbench

    attempt 1 --> the image I used I think was too low resolution so it wasnt able to recognize any of the glyphs
    attempt 2 --> uploaded a different image and spent a long while with the drawing tool but I think I made too many drawing lines or something because it ended up freezing up my computer
    attempt 3 --> used the same image and made sure to draw minimally, got to the next stage and the site wasnt really able to correctly identify any of the glyphs so I had to pick them all out, I found a few of them werent in the list as far as I could tell, then I got to the translation stage but I couldn't figure out how it works
    overall, interesting tool idea, but I think since hieroglyphics can be written in so many different styles I think its hard to do properly, the ones I uploaded didn't really match the ones on the site and furthermore I don't think the tool is much useful without prior knowledge of hieroglyphics at the transliteration stage because I couldn't figure it out   

The Origins of Doha Project
http://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/109405/1/eBook_CHNT20_Morgan_etal_2015.pdf

    The Origins of Doha project explores the foundation and the historic growth of Doha, itstransformation into a modern city, and the lives and experiences of its people through acombination of archaeological investigation, historical research and oral testimony. 
    Nick Merriman situates public archaeology as a way to “encourage self-realisation, to enrich people's lives and stimulate reflection and creativity” (MERRIMAN 2004:7). 
    The Origins of Doha team designed an outreach strategy that is cognizant of criticism in both online and in-person public archaeology while accounting for the specific context of Qatar. Understanding that there are multiple publics and stakeholders who engage with archaeological interpretations of the past is key to shaping a more effective outreach strategy. 
    As of August 2015, there are over 2.2 million people in Qatar: 1.7 million men and 537,000 women. The last census published in 2012 by the Qatar Information Exchange reveals that the population at that time was comprised of 166,000 Qataris compared to 1.6 million Non-Qataris. 
    As of 2013, eighty-five percent of households in Qatar have access to the Internet and of that, ninety-three percent use social networking platforms. One-hundred percent of the population has a mobile phone, with sixty-three percent owning smartphones (Qatar ICT Landscape 2014). 
    Re-photography is a widely employed technique partly based on Prince’s Principle: the use of historic photographs to investigate the landscape by locating specific viewsheds, taking a digital photograph from that viewshed, then using photo-manipulation software to blend the two photographs together (PRINCE 1988). Prince’s Principle has been used by historical archaeologists to locate sites; recent advances in photographic manipulation has enabled non-specialist use of re-photography to produce compelling composite photographs that evoke past uses of landscape while providing a familiar modern referent. 
    Unfortunately we cannot discern ethnicity or nationality within the residents of Qatar from the demographic data Facebook provides to precisely identify the in-country audience. While the Facebook posts are “liked” and shared, most of the comments are on the Wordpress blog. These comments have been very informative, providing detailed insights regarding the historical timeline of the region and have identified individuals in archival photographs. 
    While Arabic language translation is certainly the biggest challenge for ODQ outreach, other difficulties include presenting a nuanced heritage that does not tie into state-led linear narratives or a romanticized ideal of a Bedouin past (see also EXELL and RICO 2013) and carefully negotiating existing power structures that prevent the preservation of heritage either through developmental pressures or political infighting. Finally, though presenting a unified heritage discourse is troublesome, multivocality is also fraught with difficulty. For example, when collecting oral histories, the origins of individuals or their families can be a sensitive topic: regional origin, sect, the length of time settled in Qatar, and population group or tribal affiliation are tied in with status and politics to a degree that make them uncomfortable topics in a modernized Qatar. 
    
Mukurtu for mātauranga Māori: A case study in Indigenous archiving for reo and tikanga revitalisation
https://www.waikato.ac.nz/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/394945/chapter25.pdf

    Nevertheless, perhaps the beauty and adaptability of Mukurtu is that it is premised on a non-academic, non-classical system of knowledge management. This allows digital heritage content to be organised around traditional narratives and alternative, user-led organising classifications. It also allows for nuanced sharing and access protocols at all levels: by site, by community or subcommunity, by user, or at an item (object or metadata) level.
    For example, if a tribe has traditional access parameters around the viewing of sacred materials limited only to elders, or if some songs should only be heard in specific seasons, ...they can use these protocols to determine access within the database itself. (2015, p. 5).
    The database allows collections of kupu or words to be curated in relation to digital heritage items, or collections. It creates links between wordlist entries and their source files, highlighting the significance in this database of linking provenanced language sources with related items.
    As Taranaki increasingly loses its native speakers, the need to find additional language sources and evidence of traditional language use becomes even more critical. Inherent in this repatriation work is the notion of ethical practice, and emphasising the traditional knowledge rights of Taranaki whānui in relation to mātauranga being analysed as well as the creation of new records. 
    This pilot project took a year to complete, and reveals great potential for the use of Mukurtu software to connect flax roots communities with taonga tuku iho in institutional collections. There is also as-yet untested potential for institutions to use the database as a tool of repatriation, a means of ‘handing back’ traditional knowledge to source communities in a safe and managed fashion. 
    The colonial collecting project was a destructive mechanism by which Indigenous cultural materials were removed from communities and detached from local knowledge systems. Much of this material remains today not only physically distant from local communities, but also lodged within a legal system that steadfastly refuses local claims to stewardship of these materials  ...incorporating Indigenous knowledge systems into library and archive practices will not just enhance relationships and create access to records, but more importantly, it has the potential to decolonize archival practices and modes of access (Christen, 2015, p. 2-3).
    
Using Social Media as a Source for Understanding Public Perceptions of Archaeology: Research Challenges and Methodological Pitfalls
https://journal.caa-international.org/articles/10.5334/jcaa.39/

    If we understand archaeology and heritage as a series of social practices, we can perhaps envision data that can be extracted from contemporary social media discussions on archaeological topics as a field site for the examination of heritage-focused social and economic power structures, of political expediency, and the source of symbolic resources for nationhood and identity. As Richardson & Lindgren have argued previously (2017: 140) ‘it is here at the intersection of archaeology and sociology where we are most likely to radically advance our understanding of the relationship between digital technologies and archaeological knowledge from a uniquely social perspective’. 
    In a Global North atomised by fresh claims of Fake News, science scepticism, and the reanimation of race science (Saini 2019), there has never been a more important moment at which to try to understand what meaning society ascribes to archaeology and archaeologists, and to actively use our professional, expert knowledge and voice in public discourse (Niklasson & Hølleland 2018; Zuanni 2017). However, we first have to understand how these public discourses are created, how they emerge in in the digital world, the circumstances under which archaeology is discussed as a socially relevant subject, and how these discussions are mediated and socially enacted in digital society – what Zuanni describes as ‘new opportunities to observe how users engage with archaeology in their everyday lives, beyond professional initiatives’ (2017: 1). 
    The use of social media as a data source presents its own methodological pitfalls, not least the fact that some forms of social media data are effectively inaccessible to the average researcher. 
    ***Currently, Twitter can be accessed through the Developer API, although potential users need to register an application and provide detailed information about the form and scope of the research they wish to undertake. When applying for my own developer access, I had to answer a series of emails which asked for very detailed information about the future use of the data gathered from the platform, including my plans to publish, and the potential use of images and screenshots taken from the site at any point in the future. The developer use policies have several restricted use policies which include subjects such as health, political beliefs or religious affiliation, all of which might be highly relevant to the social researcher (Twitter Help Center 2019).***
    Using data collection methods that require less technical understanding, or data that are easier to access might lead to a ‘scrape-analyse-conclude’ process in heritage research which is epistemologically troubling and technologically determinist. Access to data from easier-to-reach platforms such as Wikipedia or Reddit, or even user comments, blogs and fora are fields that are relatively unexplored by heritage scholars. As Marres argues (2017: 114) we perhaps need to reduce the role of technological considerations in the first iterations of our research methodology designs, and become device or platform aware, rather than device or platform driven.
    According to boyd and Crawford (2014: 663) ‘big data’ can be defined as: ‘…a cultural, technological, and scholarly phenomenon that rests on the interplay of: Technology: maximizing computation power and algorithmic accuracy to gather, analyze, link, and compare large data sets. Analysis: drawing on large data sets to identify patterns in order to make economic, social, technical, and legal claims. Mythology: the widespread belief that large data sets offer a higher form of intelligence and knowledge that can generate insights that were previously impossible, with the aura of truth, objectivity, and accuracy.’
    The recent challenges faced by the academic community who wish to access platform data is a reminder that digital scholars need to first engage with increasingly complex technological skills, and tools with which to collect data, such as the use of APIs and web scraping. In practical terms, this means that social/digital archaeologists need to either have previous experience of digital data capture and coding skills, or time and money to acquire these skills, or have access to human and computing resources who can provide these technical research support. 
    Data capture means data cleaning, which is theory-laden in itself. The analysis of the data captured begins first with processing and cleaning, which almost always ‘relies on some form of “data reduction” and indeed, prior categorization’ (Marres 2017: 20). 
    Many of the associated tweets containing racist comments and material about the Cheddar Man reconstruction have been removed over time (although not immediately), and many accounts which initially made racist posts or memes have been suspended or shut down. It is interesting to reflect on Boellstorff’s (2013) concept of ‘rotted data’ within a data assemblage here, and the intentional and unintentional intervention of both platform algorithm (Twitter auto-detection of keywords that contravene its terms of use) and human intervention (reporting).
    Understanding that these data are not produced simply as the result of data science applied to heritage relevant material is important. Large data sets created for social research are made up of both human and machine data and metadata. These are best understood as emergent data assemblages (Lupton 2016: 2) which only emerge through human/technology encounters and re-encounters in these social/political/economic/technological overlaps. 
    As Lindgren (2017: 238) has argued, ‘…research about digital society demands continuous critical reflection’. Since the field of digital social research has no single accepted methodological tradition, and the speed of the development of digital technologies, alongside social interactions, creates new data types and contexts, there is an urgency around the subject of ethics in the practice of digital research. 
    Lindgren (2017: 241) building on the work of Boellstorff et al. (2012) also offers the following points to keep in mind during the choice of methodology and ethical decision-making: ‘The principle of care. Taking good care of informants and making sure they gain something from their participation. Informed consent. Make sure that the informants know about the nature and purposed of the study. Mitigating legal risk. Be aware of the relevant laws the govern one’s own research. Anonymity. Avoiding the inappropriate revelation of the identities of the informants – or any sort of confidential details or otherwise – that might lead to their identification. Deception. Don’t pretend to be something you are not, and don’t use ‘fly on the wall’ practices to study sensitive topics. Empathy. Try to forge a ‘sympathetic depiction of informants’ lives, even when discussing aspects of informants’ lives that some might find troubling. This does not have to mean the researcher ‘agrees’ with any actions or beliefs of the informants, but one must labour to ‘grasp informants’ own vision of their worlds.’
    Responsible research in digital heritage should start with an understanding of the variety of ethical guidance documents available to digital researchers. Organisations such as the Association of Internet Researchers Ethics Working Committee (Buchanan & Markham 2012), the British Sociological Association (2019), and the British Psychological Society (2017), amongst others, publish comprehensive guidance material for digital research. 
    As Rogers notes, the purposes of social media are ‘success theatre and projection, productive networking and consumer futurism’ (Rogers 2018: 454): that is, a tool focused on self-projection, whether consciously or not. It is only by seeking to describe and decode the interactions observed online that are embedded in everyday lives that we can hope to understand the meaning, use and value applied to the archaeological and historical information in the multitude of social practices we encounter on the internet.
    Hine’s discussion (2015) of ethnography with the internet moves beyond the concept of online/offline and digital versus ‘real’ world practices and actions, and better reflects the embedded role the internet has in societies and actions in the Global North.
    The internet is not ‘some sort of meta-entity’ (Lindgren 2017: 267) where online activities and use of the internet a) separate parts of people’s actions or identities or b) used similarly everywhere, at all times, for the same things. 
    Hashtags may be used for a variety of social and reasons, including to demonstrate community identity and empathy. However, hashtags are also used for less positive, disruptive activities such as trolling, hate-posting, or to hijack a trending topic. People may take to Twitter to subtweet, to screen capture and quote tweet, or to indicate feeling without using text, instead using an emoji, series of emoji, an image or a GIF. Similar subversive or non-textual activity takes place across all social media platforms. 
    The majority of social interactions on social media are not always collective, persistent or thick and may be made by singletons, disconnected from any discussion. The types of interactions may in fact be as shallow as a like, a favourite or the posting of a reaction emoji, the meaning of which cannot be interpreted with any reliability (Andrejevic 2013: 15). 
    For example, my research on Twitch demonstrated that the use of emoji were often made at speed, during fast on-screen game play, and could be interpreted as channels for excitement, humour, keeping a hand in the conversation, or even as a form of trolling, rather than statements of serious intent or meaning.
    Lindgren’s call (2017: 234) for methodological pragmatism is a powerful one. By focusing on the issue or issues to be researched and thinking deeply and critically about the types of understanding that is sought, the research methodologies can emerge as a ‘patchwork of solutions’ as they arise. 
    Grounded Theory is a qualitative research and analysis method first suggested by Glaser and Strauss in 1967 which facilitates ‘the discovery of theory from data’ (Glaser & Strauss 1967: 1) through observation of and iterative reflection on social actions, attitudes and participation (Charmaz 1995; Charmaz 2006). Grounded Theory is especially useful when ‘the study of social interactions or experiences aims to explain a process, not to test or verify an existing theory’ (Lingard, Albert & Levinson 2008: 459) and offers the methodological pragmatist the flexibility to observe and explain how collective and individual actors operate.
    The process of Grounded Theory is very much a bricolage, in the sense that the researcher improvises concepts and relationships that emerge from the raw collected data, which are then iteratively organised and reorganised into themes. These eventually emerge as a series of concepts which can be drawn from the data itself, both during and after the ‘data collection and analysis phases of the research’ (Charmaz 1995: 28). 
    ***There is a broader role for academics to advocate collectively with political and regulatory bodies for access to platform data. I would also support Bruns’ call to social media researchers to conclude their papers with the call to action for ‘social media platforms provide transparent data access to critical, independent, public-interest research’ (Bruns 2019: 18). However, we must also be aware that our data sources are also used for nefarious purposes and hate speech, and platforms that improve privacy and data security are not necessarily undertaking anti-research actions. ***
    Robust research will only arise when we can also follow the activities of the social media user, who is a rounded dynamic social being who deserves to be treated ethically, as well as being treated as a form and source of data.

At the Heart of the Ikaahuk Archaeology Project
https://digiarch.netlify.app/data/hodgetts-kelvin.pdf

    As part of the Western scienti!c tradition, the discipline of archaeology has always emphasized the intellectual aspects of our work as archaeologists. This volume pro-vides a welcome opening for us to consider the emotional side of what we do. This chapter  explores  our  personal  trajectories  towards  a  more  heart-centred  practice through our experiences as part of the Ikaahuk Archaeology Project– a community-focussed research project in the largely Inuvialuit1 community of Sachs Harbour in Canada’s Northwest Territories (Fig.7.1).
    We argue that a heart-centred approach to archaeology makes our research caring work– work done with and for others– and that its out-comes, while more personally rewarding for us as people, are not valued in the same way within academia as those of a mind-centred approach. A heart-centred archae-ology  therefore  calls  us  to  action  to  restructure  not  just  our  research  lives  but  the institutional and legislative contexts within which many of us work.
    ***Our re#ections are inspired by the feminist call for knowledge production to be more  of  a  work  of  the  heart.  Hilary  Rose  (1983)  suggested  that  feminists  should ground their epistemology in “hand, brain, and heart”, by which she meant that it should not only be about the abstraction of thought (the brain) but also about activ-ism  (doing–  the  hand)  and  what  she  called  “caring  labour”  (the  heart).***
    We   a g r e e   w i t h   R o s e   (1983) that we should move beyond the mind/body divi-sion that underlies Western epistemology, grounding our knowledge in the hand, or  perhaps  more  properly  in  the  body,  through  doing  and  in  the  heart,  through caring. This more holistic approach draws not just on the feminist critique of sci-ence  (e.g.  Haraway 1988;  Harding 1986;  Keller 1985;  Longino 1990),  which undermines traditional Western understandings of science as objective and ratio-nal, but also on Indigenous ways of knowing. 
    For us, a heart-centred practice means bringing this caring, holistic approach into all aspects of our work as academic archaeologists: research, teaching, and service (see also Lyons and Supernant, this volume). We believe that doing so will bene!t archaeology, archaeologists, and the communi-ties  we  work  with,  because  it  will  guide  us  to  support  one  another  rather  than serving  only  our  own  interests  or  competing  with  each  other  (see  also  Surface-Evans, this volume). The two of us have travelled different paths to these conclu-sions,  though  in  recent  years,  our  journeys  have  intertwined  and  informed  each other.  We  begin  by  sharing  how  we  both  came  to  participate  in  the  Ikaahuk Archaeology Project.
    Over  the  course  of  the  project,  as  I  learned  more  about  community  members’ values,  beliefs  and  epistemologies,  something  Laura  helped  me  to  better  under-stand, the research moved away from more traditional archaeological approaches to less  traditional  ones  that  are  more  community-driven.  Our  initial  work  involved survey, including geophysical survey in response to community members’ wishes for less invasive methods, and some targeted excavation of a site threatened by ero-sion– which is accelerating in the region in response to climate change.
    Through listening and trying to respond to the needs of com-munity members in Sachs Harbour, my research has become less about reconstruct-ing  past  lives  from  material  remains  and  more  about  working  with  community members  to  facilitate  their  access  to  their  archaeological  heritage  and  supporting them as they make meaning from those remains. It #ows from my personal relation-ships with community members, which makes it a work of the heart, and it is about connecting them with things that have emotional and spiritual meaning and value for  them–  things  of  the  heart.  
    When I took Lisa’s Arctic archaeology course in 2006, it was the !rst time  I  had  an  archaeology  instructor  explicitly  discussing  the  colonial  roots  of archaeology and the continued impacts it has on Indigenous communities– issues that  had  deterred  me  from  pursuing  a  career  in  archaeology.  She  also  taught  our class about ways that Indigenous communities and archaeologists (and Indigenous archaeologists!)  are  working  together  to  build  research  projects  that  empower Indigenous communities and build holistic and inclusive understandings of the past.
    After !nishing my Masters, I came back to Western to do a PhD with Lisa, as part of the Ikaahuk Archaeology Project.  My  research  explored  how  Sachs  Harbour  community  members  produce and maintain historical knowledge in order to determine how archaeological knowl-edge can best complement Inuvialuit understandings and ways of knowing the past (Kelvin 2016). 
    ***Attentiveness to the needs of Sachs Harbour community members has taught us the importance of embodied action– doing– to their understanding of their history and identity as Inuvialuit. Doing has an important social element– it often happens with others and involves sharing stories and other knowledge. This is a common feature of  many  Indigenous  knowledge  systems,  in  which  knowledge  is  understood  as inseparable  from  the  social  relations  within  which  it  is  created  (Cajete 2015). Western academics study the past intellectually and know the past primarily in their minds. Community members from Sachs Harbour tell us that they learn about the past  through  doing,  the  same  way  they  traditionally  learned  about  most  things (Kelvin 2016).  Learning  the  past  through  doing  means  engaging  one’s  body  and heart,  as  well  as  mind  in  the  process.  Betty  Haogak  told  Laura  that  community members learn about the past “by living it”, and Kevin Gully explained that learning through  doing  involves  “going  to  the  source  of  history”. When  they  describe  this concept of learning about the past through doing, community members are usually referring to “traditional” activities like sewing, hunting, trapping, and food prepara-tion. By taking part in traditional activities, often on the land in places used by their ancestors,  people  experience  and  know  the  past  in  ways  that  cannot  be  learned through  oral  histories. ***
    Learning through doing also happens through “nontraditional” activities, for exam-ple, photography and participating in culturally themed Facebook groups (Fig.7.3).
        -dubious claim
    Even when people  engage  in  these  activities  alone,  they  remember  learning  these  skills  from family and friends, practising them at other times and places, and feeling connected to their community, their ancestors, and their heritage. This more holistic approach, incorporating the body, heart, and mind, is central to Inuvialuit ways of understand-ing, teaching, and learning about their past and to Inuvialuit identity.
    During the 2013 survey !eld season and 2014 excavation !eld season, we hired Inuvialuit to join our !eld crew. These positions went primarily to local youth because community members told us youth needed summer work opportunities close to home.
    We  have  had  mixed  success  with  this  approach.  Some  students  were  very engaged, others less so. We recognize that these efforts simply involved Inuvialuit in  Western  archaeological  ways  of  doing.  Community  members  have  suggested they would be more effective and meaningful if we could incorporate more tradi-tional activities into this shared time on the land and !nd more ways to bring differ-ent generations together so they can share their knowledge. Both are elements that are featured in our current work.
    The  Inuvialuit  adults  on  the  trip  felt  that  putting  the  digitization  in  the  hands  of youth was important in giving these young people a sense of ownership over their past and in empowering them to contribute to the documentation and interpretation of  their  cultural  heritage.  Beverly  Amos,  a  linguist  at  the  Inuvialuit  Cultural Resource Centre who participated in the trip, said to Lisa: “They should be doing your jobs one day”. We could not agree more.
    Drawing on  the  strong  tradition  of  storytelling  in  Inuvialuit  culture,  we  asked  students  to select an artefact and write and illustrate a story about it (Fig.7.5). They had already heard the Elders’ stories about many of these objects. Now they imagined for them-selves how these artefacts featured in the lives of their ancestors. All of the students were  highly  invested  in  this  activity,  and  their  stories  are  featured  on  our  project website (http://www.ikaahukarchaeologyproject.com/pwnhc.html).
    Haudenosaunee scholar Patricia Monture (2009: 92-93) writes: “such-and-such content is not the essential ingredient of a good Aboriginal education . . . . Building con!dence and teaching to empowerment are more important ideals because they are the tools that allow us to confront Whiteness, oppression, and colonialism”. We aspire to achieve these ideals by putting our research tools in the hands of Inuvialuit youth and having them contribute directly to project outputs. If, in the process, we can help to support or spark their interest in their past and help them develop the skills  to  pursue  those  interests  into  a  career,  we  will  have  succeeded  beyond  our wildest dreams. We were both excited to see that 2years after our PWNHC trip, a Facebook post by one of the youth participants read: “Dream job: actress or archae-ologist”.  It  gave  us  hope  that  one  day  she  or  another  student  in  the  future  might make our work their own and take it in new directions.
    Building caring relationships with community members is a pillar of community-based approaches, and prioritizing our relationships with people in Sachs Harbour is at the core of our heart-centred practice. Building trusting relationships has been both a challenge and a pleasure, has taken (and continues to take) time, and means that we are emotionally invested in this work. These relationships have shaped the path of the Ikaahuk Archaeology Project and our future research.
    As educated, White women from the south, our life experiences are substantially different from those of people in Sachs Harbour, who cope daily with transgenera-tional trauma, the effects of residential schools,2 poverty, and a system that provides inadequate health care and housing. A heart-centred practice has meant confronting these experiences and our own privilege, rather than regarding them as outside the scope of a “mind-centred” archaeology. We recognize the structural racism Inuvialuit face in their daily lives and the negative impact it can have on their own perceptions of their culture and heritage. We have had to re#ect on how archaeology and aca-demia have played a role in this racism through the mining and removal of material culture, whitewashing of Inuit history, and academic gatekeeping and by contribut-ing to popular misconceptions about the Inuit (Steckley 2009).
    Community  members  have  sometimes  questioned  our  motives.  Someone  once suggested that we were reaching out to the community only to get an archaeology permit and ensure we could meet our goals as archaeologists. This was partly true, as community approval is required for research permits and licences in the Northwest Territories. However, the caring relations to which we aspire align our interests with those of our community partners: “those who conscientiously care for others are not seeking primarily to further their own interests, their interests are intertwined with the persons they care for. ... They seek ... to preserve or promote an actual human relation  between  themselves  and  particular  others.  Persons  in  caring  relations  are acting for self and other together” (Held 2006: 12).
    In  many ways,  we  need  them  a  lot  more  than  they  need  us,  not  just  for  approval  of  our research or logistical support but for guidance navigating an unfamiliar place and friendship and emotional support while we are far from home.
    ***We worked past this initial scepticism by returning to the community and show-ing our commitment to attentiveness and responsiveness by continually asking for and  applying  community  input,  sharing  our  research  results,  building  social  rela-tionships through volunteering and participating at community events, and visiting with community members, often over tea. Nonetheless, there were still times when community members were critical of project efforts, suggesting we use our research funding  to  address  more  pressing  community  issues,  such  as  improving  housing. Sometimes those comments have been made in anger and have been hurtful to us as individuals in the moment. We remind ourselves that they re#ect deeper frustrations with systemic injustices. Given the many challenges facing the community, we have often  contemplated  and  sometimes  questioned  the  value  of  our  archaeological research on Banks Island.***
    We  set  out  to  build  relationships  through  community-based  research  because  we care  that  archaeology  has  been  used  as  a  tool  for  a  colonial  system  in  the  past. Caring  about  something  is  not  the  same  as  caring  labour.  Our  relationships  with community  members,  the  caring  labour  that  we  do  together,  means  that  we  care about this colonial history in a deeper, more personal way than if we did not have these  connections. As  outsiders,  we  can  never  fully  understand  Inuvialuit  experi-ences of colonialism or the full weight of its impact on their community, but what Inuvialuit have shared with us about their experiences, and the much more that goes unsaid,  drives  us  to  keep  doing  archaeology  in  a  good  way,  as  determined  by Inuvialuit.  
    ***We are encouraged that community members tell us that the work we are doing together is important.***
    Many community members see greater knowledge of the past as part of moving beyond the impacts of the residential school system, and archaeology as one way of enhancing  that  knowledge,  and  regaining  some  of  what  has  been  lost.  
    Most community members feel that artefacts connect them to their ancestors or that the artefacts embody the spirits of their ancestors. 
    In terms of Rose’s (1983) hand, we focussed earlier on learning through doing with Inuvialuit community members, but she also meant doing in the sense of activism and working for change. 
    Academic  structures  have  long  valued  research over other scholarly endeavours, prioritizing a Western rational approach to research over  a  more  holistic  one  inspired  by  Indigenous  ways  of  knowing  and  feminist approaches. They measure success (also framed as “impact”) in terms of the num-ber and quality (based on publication venue) of peer-reviewed publications. 
    The permitting pro-cess requires that all permit requests are sent to the Community Corporation and the Hunters and Trappers Committee in the community closest to the proposed work. Communities can thus control archaeological !eldwork on their traditional territo-ries, since a permit will be denied of the community does not approve. However, if communities do not respond within 30days, the permit is issued without commu-nity comment, so the balance of power lies with archaeologists.
    There is also no formal process to involve communities in decisions about access to archaeo-logical collections from their traditional territories after they are excavated. Once an excavation  permit  is  approved,  communities  lose  all  formal  control  of  their  arte-facts.  
    Heart-centred practice, then, can turn archaeologists into activists. In our case, it makes our work as much about social justice in the present as about reconstructing the past. It demands that we work to shift the values and priorities of our own disci-pline and academia more broadly so that they do not work counter to the aims of integrating the hand, brain, and heart. 
    Caring labour also demands that we use our expertise and our positions of privilege to help rebalance the unequal colonial power  relationships  within  our  discipline  and  in  the  policies  and  legislation  that govern our work. It broadens our de!nition of what constitutes archaeology so that it is not solely about studying the past through material remains but exploring the ongoing  connections  between  the  past  and  present  through  lived  experience. Because it is grounded in open, respectful relationships with the Indigenous north-erners whose heritage we study, and because they value the work we do together, we !nd  this  work  far  more  personally  ful!lling  than  a  more  traditional  mind-centred approach, which lacks these reciprocal connections with others. 
    
    
