week ten reflection

>Hine’s discussion (2015) of ethnography with the internet moves beyond the concept of online/offline and digital versus ‘real’ world practices and actions, and better reflects the embedded role the internet has in societies and actions in the Global North. - Using Social Media as a Source for Understanding Public Perceptions of Archaeology: Research Challenges and Methodological Pitfalls, Lorna-Jane Richardson

I couldn't agree more with that analysis. To think that action on the internet is somehow disconnected from 'real' society is quite absurd, and echoing [Slavoj Zizek] (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7hzSqdG3V1Q), I argue that the idea that the online mask automatically produces a 'fake' self for the person behind it is simply false.

>Currently, Twitter can be accessed through the Developer API, although potential users need to register an application and provide detailed information about the form and scope of the research they wish to undertake. When applying for my own developer access, I had to answer a series of emails which asked for very detailed information about the future use of the data gathered from the platform, including my plans to publish, and the potential use of images and screenshots taken from the site at any point in the future. The developer use policies have several restricted use policies which include subjects such as health, political beliefs or religious affiliation, all of which might be highly relevant to the social researcher (Twitter Help Center 2019). - Using Social Media as a Source for Understanding Public Perceptions of Archaeology: Research Challenges and Methodological Pitfalls, Lorna-Jane Richardson

I found it quite interesting to read over this passage because, placing it in the context of one of the earlier readings of this course which questioned the ethics of using publicly available social media data, Twitter seems to be doing exactly what they should be doing to protect user's data. Indeed, Richardson's article emphasises the importance of informed consent when dealing with 'informants' but doesn't question whether users have given informed consent for their posts to be scraped when she discusses web scraping.

>Western academics study the past intellectually and know the past primarily in their minds. Community members from Sachs Harbour tell us that they learn about the past  through  doing,  the  same  way  they  traditionally  learned  about  most  things (Kelvin 2016).  Learning  the  past  through  doing  means  engaging  one’s  body  and heart,  as  well  as  mind  in  the  process.  Betty  Haogak  told  Laura  that  community members learn about the past “by living it”, and Kevin Gully explained that learning through  doing  involves  “going  to  the  source  of  history”. When  they  describe  this concept of learning about the past through doing, community members are usually referring to “traditional” activities like sewing, hunting, trapping, and food prepara-tion. By taking part in traditional activities, often on the land in places used by their ancestors,  people  experience  and  know  the  past  in  ways  that  cannot  be  learned through  oral  histories.

This 'learning the past through doing' makes a lot of sense to me because I feel like I have had similar experiences myself while helping my father in the garden planting tomatoes, beans, cucumbers, etc. This is not an activity that is a regular part of my life, but for many of my ancestors (and for all people who farm, past and present, for that matter) it was (/is), so I cannot help but feel like I understand them a little bit more through doing that.


